.TH ls 1 "20 September 2016" "version 0.0"

.SH NAME
ls \- list directory contents

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ls [ -AaCcdFfhiklnqRrSstuwx1 ]
[
.I file ...
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
For each operand that names a
.I file
of a type other than directory,
.B ls
displays its name as well as any requested, associated information. For each
operand that names a
.I file
of type directory,
.B ls
displays the names of files contained within that directory, as well as any
requested, associated information.

.PP
If no operands are given, the contents of the current directory are displayed.
If more than one operand is given, non-directory operands are displayed first;
directory and non-directory operands are sorted separately and in
lexicographical order.

.PP
The following options are available:

.TP
.B -A
List all entries except for '.' and '..'. Always set for the super-user.

.TP
.B -a
Include directory entries whose names begin with a dot ('.').

.TP
.B -C
Force multi-column output; this is the default when output is to a terminal.
(This option may not be supported.)

.TP
.B -c
Use time when file status was last changed, instead of time of last modification
of the file for sorting (
.B -t
) or printing (
.B -l
).

.TP
.B -d
Directories are listed as plain files (not searched recursively) and symbolic
links in the argument list are not indirected through.

.TP
.B -F
Display a slash ('/') immediately after each pathname that is a directory, an
asterisk ('*') after each that is executable, an at sign ('@') after each
symbolic link, a percent sign ('%') after each whiteout, an equal sign ('=')
after each socket, and a vertical bar ('|') after each that is a FIFO.

.TP
.B -f
Output is not sorted.

.TP
.B -h
Modifies the
.B -s
and
.B -l
options, causing the sizes to be reported in bytes displayed in a human readable
format. Overrides
.B -k.

.TP
.B -i
For each file, print the file's file serial number (inode number).

.TP
.B -k
Modifies the
.B -s
option, causing the sizes to be reported in kilobytes. The rightmost of the
.B -k
and
.B -h
flags overrides the previous flag. See also
.B -h.

.TP
.B -l
(The lowercase letter "ell"). List in long format. (See below).

.TP
.B -n
the same as
.B -l
, except that the owner and group IDs are displayed numerically rather than
converting to a owner or group name.

.TP
.B -q
Force printing of non-printable characters in file names as the character '?';
this is the default when output is to a terminal.

.TP
.B -R
Recursively list subdirectories encountered.

.TP
.B -r
Reverse the order of the sort to get reverse lexicographical order or the
smallest or oldest entries first.

.TP
.B -S
Sort by size, largest file first.

.TP
.B -s
Display the number of file system blocks actually used by each file, in units of
512 bytes or BLOCKSIZE (see
.B ENVIRONMENT
) where partial units are rounded up to the next integer value. If the output is
to a terminal, a total sum for all the file sizes is output on a line before the
listing.

.TP
.B -t
Sort by time modified (most recently modified first) before sorting the operands
by lexicographical order.

.TP
.B -u
Use time of last access, instead of last modification of the file for sorting (
.B -t
) or printing (
.B -l
).

.TP
.B -w
Force raw printing of non-printable characters. This is the default when output
is not to a terminal.

.TP
.B -x
Multi-column output sorted across the page rather than down the page. (This
option may not be supported.)

.TP
.B -1
(The numeric digit "one"). Force output to be one entry per line. This is the
default when output is not to a terminal.

.PP
The
.B -w,
and
.B -q
options override each other; the last one specified determines the format used
for non-printable characters.

.PP
The
.B -1, -C, -l, -n,
and
.B -x
options override each other; the last one specified determines the format used.

.PP
The
.B -c
and
.B -u
options override each other; the last one specified determines the file time
used.

.PP
By default,
.B ls
lists one entry per line to standard output.

.PP
File information is displayed with one or more <blank> separating the
information associated with the
.B -i, -s,
and
.B -l
options.

.SH The Long Format
If the
.B -l
option is given, the following information is displayed for each file:
.nf
.RS
file mode
number of links
owner name
group name
number of bytes in the file
abbreviated month file was last modified
day-of-month file was last modified
hour and minute file was last modified
pathname
.RE
.fi

.PP
In addition, for each directory whose contents are displayed, the total number
of blocks in units of 512 bytes or BLOCKSIZE (see
.B ENVIRONMENT
) used by the files in the directory is displayed on a line by itself
immediately before the information for the files in the directory.

.PP
If the owner or group names are not a known owner or group name, or the
.B -n
option is given, the numeric IDs are displayed.

.PP
If the file is a character special or block special file, the major and minor
device numbers for the file are displayed in the size field. If the file is a
symbolic link the pathname of the linked-to file is preceded by "->".

.PP
the file mode printed under the
.B -l
option consists of the entry type, owner permissions, group permissions, and
other permissions. The entry type character describes the type of file, as
follows:

.RS
.TP
.B a
Archive state 1.

.TP
.B A
Archive state 2.

.TP
.B b
Block special file.

.TP
.B c
Character special file.

.TP
.B d
Directory.

.TP
.B l
Symbolic link.

.TP
.B s
Socket link.

.TP
.B p
FIFO.

.TP
.B w
Whiteout.

.TP
.B -
Regular file.
.RE

.PP
The next three fields are three characters each: owner permissions, group
permissions, and other permissions. Each field has three character positions:

.RS
.TP
1.
If
.B r,
the file is readable; if
.B -,
it is not readable.

.TP
2.
If
.B w,
the file is writeable; if
.B -,
it is not writeable.

.TP
3.
The first of the following that applies:

.RS
.TP
.B S
If in the owner permissions, the file is not executable and set-user-ID mode is
set. If in group permissions, the file is not executable and set-group-ID-mode
is set.

.TP
.B s
If in the owner permissions, the file is executable and set-user-ID mode is set.
If in the group permissions, the file is executable and set-group-ID mode is
set.

.TP
.B x
The file is executable or the directory is searchable.

.PP
The next two apply only to the third character in the last group (other
permissions).

.TP
.B T
The sticky bit is set (mode 1000), but not execute or search permission. (see
.BR chmod (1)
or
.BR sticky (7).)

.TP
.B t
The sticky bit is set (mode 1000), and is searchable or executable. (see
.BR chmod (1)
or
.BR sticky (7).)
.RE
.RE

.PP
The number of bytes displayed for a directory is a function of the number of
.BR dirent (5)
structures in the directory, not all of which may be allocated to any existing
file.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.B ls:

.TP
BLOCKSIZE
If the environment variable BLOCKSIZE is set, and the
.B -h
and
.B -k
options are not specified, the block counts (see
.B -s
) will be displayed in units of that size block.

.TP
TZ
The timezone to use when displaying dates. See
.BR environ (7)
for more information.

.SH EXIT STATUS
The
.B ls
utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.

.SH COMPATIBILITY
The group field is now automatically included in the long listing for files in
order to be compatible with the IEEE Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2") specification.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chmod (1),
.BR stat (2),
.BR strmode (3),
.BR getbsize (3),
.BR dir (5),
.BR sticky (7),
.BR symlink (7)

.SH STANDARDS
The
.B ls
utility is expected to be a superset of the IEEE Std 1003.2 ("POSIX.2") specification.

.SH HISTORY
An
.B ls
utility appeared in Version 5 AT&T UNIX.
